Add RFD for identifier-first login feature (#54886)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0214-identifier-first-login.md

---
authors: Yassine Bounekhla (yassine@goteleport.com)
---

# RFD 0214 - Notifications

## Required Approvals

- Engineering: @zmb3
- Product: @roraback

## What

Identifier-first login allowing support for mapping SSO providers to users.

## Why

> Currently, every user of a cluster sees a list of all SSO identity providers setup with Teleport on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, every user of a cluster sees a list of all SSO identity providers set up with Teleport on the
```

login page. This results in unnecessary clutter and potential confusion, as it is likely that
they can/will only ever use one. Allowing cluster admins to map SSO providers to particular users or groups of users mitigates this by ensuring that a user only sees the identity providers relevant to them.

For example, if contractors need access to my cluster and they use their own identity provider
(ie. Okta), their login flow can be simplified by ensuring that they only ever have the option to log
in using it, as opposed to also seeing the identity providers that my regular users use but that are
unusable to them, and vice versa.

Additionally, users will be remembered so that the next time they visit the login page, they'll

> automatically be shown the auth connector(s) relevant to them.

Reviewer 2: how does this work? i know generally the idea is that these machines arent super "shared", but do we store the user in some localstorage or do we store the response? i think storing the response would be better so that we cant somehow know which user last used it (and their email/username whatever).

Author: We'd need to store the username because that's really the only way to have a "remembered user" flow with a "welcome back _____" screen. Storing the response would not be ideal because it means that if a cluster admin made changes to auth connector configs (or added/deleted a connector) in the meantime, `localStorage` would be out of sync and a user wouldn't get the updates since they're seeing the locally stored outdated response. Intuitively it doesn't feel like there's much of a risk storing a username string in `localStorage`, thoughts? @zmb3

Author: it's also to solve the problem of knowing which connectors should be matched to the remembered user, since it's per-user and based on the username, we'd need the username to make that request

Reviewer 2: users should at least have the option to be remembered and not be remembered by default.i suppose leaving your username isn't the worst thing in the world, so i won't die on that hill. and most people aren't sharing devices. but it should definitely be cleared if the user manually logs out.

Reviewer: Sure, that's fair.

Author: > but it should definitely be cleared if the user manually logs out

@avatus I feel like if we don't remember the user when they log out of Teleport manually, but remember them when they were logged out some other way (like if their session timed out), it could lead to odd UX that seems broken. I'd imagine most users sometimes log out manually, and sometimes forget to and are logged out automatically. It would feel odd if sometimes when I want to log in I see a "welcome back" screen with my email pre-filled and connectors ready to go, and other times have to enter it manually, and this is just determined by the particular way I logged out last time (which I most likely did not pay much attention to nor remember). 

If there are no security concerns with storing the username locally, I'd prefer if we didn't base the remembered user behaviour on the logout method, since that would essentially mean we'd only be giving them the convenience of not having to fill their email in again _if_ they forgot to log out manually last time. I just tested with Airbase and whether I logged out manually or had my session timed out, the SSO login screen had my email remembered. If a user explicitly wants to be cleared from memory (such as if their computer is shared), then they have the option of clicking "not you?" and the login screen will get set to default and they'll be cleared from memory. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: sounds good to me!

## Details

Identifier-first login will be configured in an auth connector's resource yaml. Any given auth
connector can be configured with a `user_matchers` field containing a set of RegEx pattern(s) that
can match usernames. When a user visits the login page, they will be prompted to provide a username,
after which they'll be shown all the auth connectors configured to match it.

> If this field is not set, the auth connector will default to matching all users.

Reviewer: I see two options here.

The first is exactly what you proposed. Unset is basically equivalent to a regex/glob that matches everything.

One property of this approach is that you have to update ALL connectors to add the matchers in order to make sure users only see the connectors they're supposed to.

For example, if my cluster uses an Okta connector for employees, and I decide to onboard a few contractors who will login with Auth0, I need to:
1. Create the Auth0 connector
2. Set the matchers in the Auth0 connector for the contractor emails.

At this point, I'm not done. Contractors will see both the Auth0 connector (which matches their emails) and the Okta connector (which matches everything). In order to complete the setup, I also need to edit the Okta connector and set matchers up so that I don't match contractor emails.

This is probably not a big deal, as most clusters will only have 1-2 connectors. Worth thinking about though!

Author: This is a good point and I did consider this when deciding on this approach, I went with this because the only reasonable alternative to having `unset` default to match all is to have it default to match nothing. You'd then have a much more disruptive issue because it means that in your scenario, once you set the contractor matcher for Auth0 (and thereby "enable" identifier-first login), as long as your Okta connector remains in its default state (with no matcher), Okta is effectively disabled and nobody would be able to see it including your regular users until you configure it with a matcher.

The current approach is preferable because in the worst case it just means that people would be able to see connectors that aren't for them (which is Teleport's current default behavior anyways). 

Like you mentioned this shouldn't be an issue for most clusters since they rarely have many connectors, but I'll make sure to explicitly mention this mechanism in the docs to prevent any confusion.

Reviewer: Very good points, thanks for the explanation. I agree with your assessment.

It should be noted that this username does not represent anything beyond being a reference to map to
connectors on the Teleport side, and users can enter any arbitrary string. For example, if a user
enters `joe@foo.com` as their username and are mapped to an Okta connector, but their Okta user is
actually `bob@foo.com`, they will be logged into Teleport as `bob@foo.com`. This detail should be
explicitly mentioned in the docs.

### Example matchers

#### Match all usernames that end in `@foo.com`

```yaml
user_matchers: [".*@foo\.com$"]
```

### Match `joe@foo.com` and all usernames that end in `@goteleport.com`

```yaml
user_matchers: ["^joe@foo.com$", ".*@goteleport\.com$"]

> ```

Author: It might not be *needed*, however I think more flexibility is better than less. Allowing any custom RegEx pattern means all matching use-cases will be supported out of the box, eg. if they want to map a connector to a specific hard-coded username, like the `joe@foo.com` example here. I figure it's better to have the granularity to begin with than to potentially have a customer later down the line request that we more ways to match users. The only downside is it makes it slightly more complicated to configure in case the cluster admin isn't familiar with RegEx, to mitigate this I'll be sure to include examples in the docs that they can copy.

> ```

Reviewer: Is there a happy medium? What if we support globs but not regex? Then you could do `*@example.com` or `yassine@example.com`.

The downside of regex is that while flexible, the UX is not great. Many Teleport administrators are not programmers, and learning RegEx syntax and escaping can be tedious.

I think `*@goteleport.com` is way more intuitive than `".*@goteleport\.com$"`.

      roles:
        - access
      value: okta-dev
  audience: https://<cluster-url>/v1/webapi/saml/acs/testconnector
  user_matchers: ["^joe@foo.com$", ".*@goteleport\.com$"]
  cert: ''
  display: Okta
  entity_descriptor: |
    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <md:EntityDescriptor xmlns:md="urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:metadata" entityID="http://www.example.com/00000000000000000000">
    ...
    </md:EntityDescriptor>
  entity_descriptor_url: ''
  issuer: http://www.example.com/00000000000000000000
  service_provider_issuer: https://teleport.com/v1/webapi/saml/acs/testconnector
  signing_key_pair:
    cert: |
      -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
      ...
      -----END CERTIFICATE-----
    private_key: |
      -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
      ...
      -----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
  sso: https://www.example.com/app/00000000000000000000/sso/saml
version: v2
```

### Implementation

Upon loading the Web UI, the server returns a web config which contains some details about the cluster
including the Teleport edition, login methods and auth connectors (stored in `window['GRV_CONFIG']`).
This will now also include the RegEx matchers per auth connector.

> All matching and filtering will be done on the client side. This is so that we can avoid having to

Reviewer: Client side matching is efficient but it does mean the set of mappings is publicly available.

If we do the matching on the server side, we don't keep the mappings 100% confidential as you can make guesses against the unauthenticated API, but we're at least not sending the full list to anyone who asks for it.

Let's think about this a little more and decide whether it's a concern or not.

Author: This is a good point, I'll adjust the implementation so that the initial config response merely tells the UI whether or not identifier-first login is enabled so that it knows whether to display the "enter your email" prompt. Once the user submits their email, it'll hit an endpoint which does the actual matching and returns the relevant connectors. For remembered users we'll make that request as soon as the page is loaded and we detect that both 1) identifier-first login is enabled and 2) there is a remembered email stored.

I'll update the RFD with this change.

introduce any additional calls to the backend once the user has provided a username. This is faster
and more performant, and also reduces complexity since it means we won't need to add and maintain any new
endpoints. Remembered usernames will be kept in `localStorage`.

> 

Reviewer 2: im not sure im a fan of storing this entire map in localstorage. 

i imagined it would be a single username field, make the request, get returned the valid auth connectors. what was the reason behind not taking this path, just managing new endpoints? new endpoints I think is viable and wouldn't be too hard for backward compat.  

we could on load, fetch the endpoint and if its 404, just show the full form until the version this lands+1, where we can just rely on it always existing.

Author: I maybe should have made it more clear, but we aren't storing the whole map in `localStorage`, only the username string. I just meant that the actual filtering will be done on the frontend, but it will be done after the backend gives us the matchers. Though I'm moving away from this and instead going to let the backend handle the filtering since it's not ideal to expose all matchers to the client for any attacker to easily see (since this is a public route). See discussion [here](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/54886#discussion_r2098576941)

#### Proto changes

`SAMLConnectorSpecV2`, `OIDCConnectorSpecV3`, and `GithubConnectorSpecV3` will need to be updated to include the `user_matchers` field.

```proto
// SAMLConnectorSpecV2 is a SAML connector specification.
message SAMLConnectorSpecV2 {
  ...
  // UserMatchers is a set of RegEx patterns to narrow down which username(s) this auth connector should
  // match for identifier-first login.
  repeated string UserMatchers = 19 [(gogoproto.jsontag) = "user_matchers,omitempty"]
}
```

```proto
// OIDCConnectorSpecV3 is an OIDC connector specification.
//
// It specifies configuration for Open ID Connect compatible external
// identity provider: https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html
message OIDCConnectorSpecV3 {
 ...
  // UserMatchers is a set of RegEx patterns to narrow down which username(s) this auth connector should
  // match for identifier-first login.

>   repeated string UserMatchers = 21 [(gogoproto.jsontag) = "user_matchers,omitempty"]

Reviewer: For OIDC we have an optional `username_claim` property. Will the `user_matchers` match against whatever claim we specify there, or will they always match against email?

Author: It will always match against the email. The OIDC `username_claim` relies on a claim returned by the IdP, but the matching for identifier-first login is completely detached from that flow and doesn't actually interact with the IdP or IdP response directly. The `user_matchers` is only used to detect whether a user-inputted string (which can be anything) should be matched to the auth connector, but this all happens on the login page before any SSO flow is initiated.

}
```

```proto
// GithubConnectorSpecV3 is a Github connector specification.
message GithubConnectorSpecV3 {
   ...
  // UserMatchers is a set of RegEx patterns to narrow down which username(s) this auth connector should
  // match for identifier-first login.

>   repeated string UserMatchers = 10 [(gogoproto.jsontag) = "user_matchers,omitempty"]

Reviewer: Does this match against the GitHub username or what? The mappings make sense when you can match against user emails, but if people have arbitrary GitHub handles is this even useful?

Author: The GitHub username itself doesn't actually matter much aside from possibly causing confusion, because these matcher mappings are entirely on the Teleport side and any string can work if configured to. This would be useful if for example you allowed all your employees (ie. everyone whose email ended with "@foo.com") to log in with either Okta or GitHub, you'd have the ability to make GitHub show up as an option.

I added it just for consistency's sake, but I assume this is probably not going to be a common use-case and might just cause unnecessary confusion, so I'll remove it and only support `user_matchers` for SAML and OIDC.

Reviewer: Oh, right.

only matched to one auth connector, they will be taken directly to that identity provider to log in.
Their username input will be stored in `localStorage`, so the next time they visit the login page, they
won't need to enter their username again. If they are matched to no connectors, an error
message will be displayed.

If a remembered user only has one connector, they will be shown a single "Log in with <connector-name>"
button to log in with that connector. If a remembered user has no connectors, which can happen if auth
connector configs were changed to exclude that user, they will be directed back to the default initial
login screen and their remembered username will be cleared from memory.

### Security

This is a relatively safe feature, as we are not exposing any sensitive information. The only security
concern would be that an attacker could theoretically poke around and get an idea of which usernames
are mapped to auth connectors. For example, if they see that `joe@foo.com` is mapped to auth connectors,
then they'll know that that email is likely real and they may try to target it with a phishing

> or social engineering attack.

Reviewer: > they'll know that that email is likely real

As you mentioned above, the value here is an arbitrary string. The attacker would know that the `foo.com` domain is likely real, but they won't have any idea whether `joe@foo.com` is real. 

Right?

Author: That's correct, unless the auth connector was mapped specifically to `joe@foo.com`

message SAMLConnectorSpecV2 {
  ...
  // UserMatchers is a set of glob patterns to narrow down which username(s) this auth connector should
  // match for identifier-first login.
  repeated string UserMatchers = 19 [(gogoproto.jsontag) = "user_matchers,omitempty"]
}
```

```proto
// OIDCConnectorSpecV3 is an OIDC connector specification.
//
// It specifies configuration for Open ID Connect compatible external
// identity provider: https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html
message OIDCConnectorSpecV3 {
 ...
  // UserMatchers is a set of glob patterns to narrow down which username(s) this auth connector should
  // match for identifier-first login.
  repeated string UserMatchers = 21 [(gogoproto.jsontag) = "user_matchers,omitempty"]
}
```

```proto
// GithubConnectorSpecV3 is a Github connector specification.
message GithubConnectorSpecV3 {
   ...
  // UserMatchers is a set of glob patterns to narrow down which username(s) this auth connector should
  // match for identifier-first login.
  repeated string UserMatchers = 10 [(gogoproto.jsontag) = "user_matchers,omitempty"]
}
```

### UX

<img src="./assets/0214-identifier-first-flow.png" width="800" />

> 

Reviewer 3: I'd add headings for each use case, for example (and hopefully I got them all):
```
#### First Time User visiting a cluster with auth connector(s) with an explicitly defined `user matchers` field
*A. Matches only one auth connector*

1. Upon visiting the login page for the first time, the user will be prompted to enter a username (1a).
2. After the user enters their username, they will be taken directly to the identity provider they matched to log in. Their username input will be stored in `localStorage`, so the next time they visit the login page, they won't need to enter their username again. 

*B. Matches 2 or more auth connectors*

1. Upon visiting the login page for the first time, the user will be prompted to enter a username (1a).
2. After a user enters their username, their username will be matched to the auth connectors relevant to them based on their `user_matchers` field, and those connectors will be displayed to them. Their username input will be stored in `localStorage`, so the next time they visit the login page, they won't need to enter their username again. 
3. Once they click on a connector, they will be taken to that identity provider to log in.

*C. Matches 0 auth connectors*

1. Upon visiting the login page for the first time, the user will be prompted to enter a username (1a).
2. After a user enters their username, an error message will be displayed. 

#### Returning User visiting a cluster with auth connector(s) with an explicitly defined `user matchers` field

*A. Correct user*
1. Upon visiting the login page, the returning user will see a welcome view with their auth connector(s) displayed to them.
2. Once they click on a connector, they will be taken to that identity provider to log in

*B. Different user on same device*

1. Upon visiting the login page, the user will see the welcome page for the last person to log in on that device.
2. The user can click "not you?" to reset the login page to default and clear their username from memory. This puts them back into the use case of a first-time user.

*C. Remembered user with no auth connectors*

This can happen if auth connector configs were changed to exclude that user. In this case, upon visiting the login page, they will be directed back to the default initial login screen and their remembered username will be cleared from memory.

#### Any user visiting a cluster with no explicitly defined `user matchers` fields in auth connectors
If there are no auth connectors with an explicitly defined `user_matchers` field, the login page will
be the same as it is now prior to the implementation of this feature (with all auth connectors listed),
this is because it means that all auth connectors match all users, and thus prompting the user for
their username is redundant and a pointless extra step. 
```
